spencer-tb: Hello!
draganrakita: He'll….
Pooja Ranjan: Hello.
Mario Vega: Hello, hello?
Mario Vega: Let me give, a couple more minutes before we start to give…
Mario Vega: People a chance to… to join.
Mario Vega: I think we can start. Yep.
Mario Vega: Awesome, thank you so much, Priya. Yeah, welcome everybody, this is ACDT number 49, today's August 18th.
Mario Vega: 2025, yeah, let's just get right into it. So the first item on the agenda is, Osaka.net.
Mario Vega: As I understand now, Fusaka.net 4 is down, what are the other updates, Barnos, if you… if you want to share?
Barnabas: Right, so there are a few, Data 3 is still online, and we plan to keep it around for the foreseeable future.
Barnabas: We are slowly rolling out the images of the trend branches of different client teams. I think most of the ERs already, have everything in their master or main.
Barnabas: And, we are waiting for the CL teams also to, start merging everything into their, developer branches.
Barnabas: And then once, that's done, then ideally we're gonna be, running .NET 5 as well, hopefully with, no more huge, changes.
Barnabas: No more spec changes needed.
Barnabas: No more spec, clarifications are needed.
Barnabas: So we are aiming to launch that, maybe next week, Tuesday.
Barnabas: Ideally, … Most client teams will have something by them in their master branches.
Mario Vega: Sounds great. Any oppositions on the timing? …
Mario Vega: I don't think there's major updates that need to be done by clients, if I understand correctly. But is there anything that needs to be…
Mario Vega: Done other than merging into main.
Mario Vega: From clients? Any concerns, basically?
Mario Vega: One message, DevNet 5 should also be pretty weak, similar to DevNet 4. Okay.
Mario Vega: Same BPO schedules, I would assume?
Mario Vega: Or it's gonna be different.
Barnabas: We're gonna try to do the, nicer numbers with, 2 to 3, 2 to 3, so target, 2-2, to max value 3.
Barnabas: to have, … We have a better calculation for the, … what's the value called?
Mario Vega: The fraction?
Barnabas: construction area.
Mario Vega: Yeah, alright.
Mario Vega: Cool.
Mario Vega: Alright.
Mario Vega: Good. This is looking good. Okay, great. …
Mario Vega: Yeah. Alright, on the testing side, I can give an update. The next item is basically VPO site tests. We are almost ready.
Mario Vega: we have tagged a new release of East that we can use to test, the clients. So the approach is gonna be that we have now, tests with the exact same, scenario that happened on the W4 fork.
Mario Vega: and other similar test cases and scenarios for that. So, we have tagged the version 1 for Devon 5, and it's currently building, and as soon as it's done.
Mario Vega: We're gonna, make the release, and then update Hive.
Mario Vega: With this, we're gonna run the tests against all clients, and just verify that the BPO issue that was present in demo 4 is already fixed by everyone.
Mario Vega: …
Mario Vega: Yeah, that's basically the update on that. We'll keep you updated, and we'll try to update Hive as soon as possible to get the information out.
Mario Vega: Alright, any comments on this, or either DevNets or static tests?
Mario Vega: From any… anyone?
Mario Vega: Yeah, right, I guess it's just waiting on… until Demet 5 for next week.
Mario Vega: Alright, good. …
Mario Vega: Moving on, on gas limit testing updates, there was a point brought up by Ben, that we should discuss 60 million gas pre-Fusaka. Ben, do you want to, expand this?
Ben Adams: Yeah, so there's been a lot of work going on to improve the worst-case scenarios, … But…
Ben Adams: will be fixed.
Ben Adams: We, post Osaka through repricing.
Ben Adams: But…
Ben Adams: sort of… I'm trying to gauge people's thoughts on going to 60 million, as was originally planned, briefly, so…
Ben Adams: Anybody has any thoughts?
Justin Florentine (Besu): Hey Ben, this is, Justin from Bayesu Team. I don't have all the details, happy to engage offline with them. We had some concerns with EC Recover, between 45 and 60 million gas.
Kamil Chodoła: Do you mean some particular scenario for EC Recover? Because from opcode testing, it was quite fast… fast enough to consider 60.
Justin Florentine (Besu): I don't wanna… I don't wanna derail this. I know that there's a separate conversation happening on Telegram. I just wanted to raise the…
Justin Florentine (Besu): issue that Bayesu has some hesitancy about going to 60 million gas.
Kamil Chodoła: So, from my perspective only, if I can chime in now, is that there are just a few things which we still need to consider. It's like, Modex performance before Fusaka repricings, is that GEF still is working on improvements.
Kamil Chodoła: There was one attempt, …
Kamil Chodoła: Which was showing quite significant improvements, but was causing some regressions in other places, so there still need to be some work being done here.
Kamil Chodoła: And yeah, I guess we'll discuss that a little bit this week, to see what else can be done, and how we can help them testing that out.
Kamil Chodoła: Other thing is that we integrated EST tests and benchmark tests. On version 3 of those benchmarks, we noticed quite a lot of slow scenarios for Bezu.
Kamil Chodoła: Which already we are in touch with by the team here, so… it was more specifically about, Mot Aris.
Kamil Chodoła: scenarios, but yeah, this needs to be analyzed. Maybe this is some other inputs in tests, which we maybe should analyze.
Kamil Chodoła: But anyways, this is done, and also there is a new version of benchmarks, which we integrated, but it's having one quite significant regression, which is causing tests to basically kill the nodes.
Kamil Chodoła: So… yeah, but this is not, like, it is slow on some particular example, on some small gas limits, but by mistake, EST tests are enabling some very, very huge blocks in giga gas. So yeah, so this might actually crash.
Kamil Chodoła: And yeah, last thing, which would be stateful testing.
Kamil Chodoła: Which I'm working on exactly right now.
Kamil Chodoła: is to enable a way on how to write and execute stateful tests on top of mainnet and bloatnet, and reproduce, for example, Xen scenarios or other heavy state access scenarios.
Kamil Chodoła: And see how impactful those will be, and, like, at least open this branch of scenarios for reproducible tension testing.
Kamil Chodoła: But yeah, hopefully this week I will have something to share with Carlos Perez to work on new scenarios out there.
Kamil Chodoła: But yeah, most specifically, the most important issues right now with 60, which I see, is ModeX with GEF.
Kamil Chodoła: And, some new scenarios found for Bezos.
Mario Vega: Excellent.
Mario Vega: So, a question from Tim on the chat is that, given EC recovery prices aren't going to be changing in Fusaka, is this a blocker for you post-fork? It sounds from Ben that it isn't, but, …
Mario Vega: Maybe we'll want to dig a little bit deeper onto that?
Mario Vega: Repricing is your programming?
Tim Beiko: Yeah, that question was for… for Bay2, yeah, not for, Nethermine, like, if, … Like, yeah, …
Tim Beiko: Is there a… plan. Like, basically, like, yeah, if…
Tim Beiko: Is there something that, like, at the client level, you think you can do to, to, improve this, or, …
Tim Beiko: Do we, like, actually need a repricing to… To, fix these issues.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Right, so I'm not running point on the gas refricing issue at the moment, so I can't really speak to that, but I do know that we have multiple opcodes, as well as the modics pre-compile, that we worry about transitioning from 45 million gas to 60 million gas. That is, …
Justin Florentine (Besu): a performance problem for us that, you know, we're currently working on it, and we're trying to optimize it, but, you know, it's a known issue.
Mario Vega: Yeah.
Mario Vega: Yeah, Camille?
Kamil Chodoła: So yeah, so looking at the data from EC, there is a EC ad scenarios which are particularly slow for Bezel.
Kamil Chodoła: …
Kamil Chodoła: Yeah, looking at the other clients, those scenarios are way much higher, and the slowest one for best-looking right now is, like, 23 megabits per second.
Kamil Chodoła: So, yeah, up for discussion, but for 60, it will be slower, but it won't reach, like, even 3 seconds blocks.
Kamil Chodoła: What would be good, yeah, as Marius is mentioning, to get, like, a…
Kamil Chodoła: There's a team statement to get exactly what… maybe there is something which we are missing here, and we should test more deeply.
Mario Vega: I think, Camille, if you can share the results that you're looking at with the best of team and with everyone, I think that that would be very helpful.
Kamil Chodoła: Yeah, I will bump it up on our Discord channel with Caslimid testing.
Mario Vega: Awesome.
Mario Vega: Alright, so it seems like we have to do more analysis based on the results. Is there any other concerns from other client teams, regarding gas limits? Do we need more benchmarking? Do we need more information, or what's the current stance from everybody else?
Mario Vega: I see Rev on the call, … Does anybody have any opinion?
Mario Vega: Alright, Red says no concern.
Mario Vega: Anybody from Ericon?
Mario Vega: No concern, okay.
Mario Vega: And Marius mentions that we need more benchmarking with regards to state, and… Yep.
Mario Vega: Maurice, do you want to expand on that, or…?
Mario Vega: On SnapSync?
Marius van der Wijden: After yours?
Marius van der Wijden: Yeah, so…
Marius van der Wijden: I don't know that much about it, but, apparently we're running, periodical snap syncs on these networks, and for Perth DevNet 2.
Marius van der Wijden: All clients failed.
Marius van der Wijden: To SnapSync within 70 hours, and, that is with it.
Marius van der Wijden: Network that is twice mainnet size, so it's not that much bigger.
Marius van der Wijden: So that is something that all clients should be aware of, and should look into what's happening on their client, and I can send some…
Marius van der Wijden: more… Info in the chat.
Mario Vega: So through… Respond to answers…
Mario Vega: con… comment, we… I think this is a work in progress. So right now, we're trying to unify.
Mario Vega: Most of the tests into execution spec tests.
Mario Vega: And we're trying to make releases to make consistent testing across all the clients, but the framework is not perfect yet.
Mario Vega: mainly we don't have stateful tests in East, because it's hard for them to produce. So we're still working on a way to have this unified. But I think at the end game, or the final…
Mario Vega: …
Mario Vega: the final, like, benchmark testing that we have is all unified in East, and we can, like, take the same measurements per team… on each client, I'm sorry, on all clients, using the same tests, yeah.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Yeah, that sounds good, and I wasn't trying to imply that we should already be there, right? Like, I think that's… that is a big project, so I was just curious, kind of, what the current state is.
Ansgar Dietrichs: I do think a nice goal eventually would be to basically get to a place where these are reliable enough that they actually give us confident visibility into blockers and bottlenecks, right? Because I do think right now we're still in this position where sometimes it's very hard to say, okay.
Ansgar Dietrichs: this looks good on all clients, but then maybe the way these benchmarks were done didn't account for all the client-specific problems, and so then, out of quote-unquote nowhere, at least from the kind of top-level view, new problems emerge, and so I think really trying to get to
Ansgar Dietrichs: the highest visibility possible, I think would be really, really valuable.
Mario Vega: Yeah, completely agree. So, and just to highlight,
Mario Vega: So the latest version that Camille mentions is… it added a lot of tests from Eastside. So I think that's one of the reasons why we spotted new things.
Mario Vega: But I think, the longer that we go on East testing, the less new tests that we're gonna see, and it's gonna be more stable.
Mario Vega: So yeah, just to summarize, we have many new tests now, and I think that's the reason why we catch some things that we didn't catch before, in my opinion.
Mario Vega: Yeah, Camille?
Kamil Chodoła: Yeah, and just exactly to that, the tests which we run right now, not yet on the desired machines, but on the side, on weaker machines that actually we use, EC Recover is, from EST test suit, is performing at 60 megabits per second for all of the clients.
Kamil Chodoła: At least 60 megabz.
Kamil Chodoła: So, not sure why I need to understand a little bit more what exactly is the thing about EC Recover.
Kamil Chodoła: Here.
Mario Vega: Also, if we can take a look at your… your specific tests that you are running for easy recover on Bisu, I think it will be very good.
Mario Vega: that we can import them into East to have them in this benchmark test set, so we can run them against all clients. So maybe there's a blind spot in our tests, specifically for East Recovery that we're not seeing.
Mario Vega: … Yep.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So I don't want to, bias this too much towards EC Recover. I think it's… it is an issue. I, again, I don't have the details on that. I think it's the, ModiXP stuff, though, that is more of a concern.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So we have specific, just to elaborate here, we have 9 opcodes and the mod EXP precompile that are below 20 million gas, 20 mega gas.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So that's… that's…
Justin Florentine (Besu): more the area of focus that we need to address if we want to consider raising gas limit before Fusaka.
Mario Vega: Of course, yeah. In any way, I think if you can share the benchmark tests, just so we can also write a similar test for East, I think that would be great, just to make sure that we're not missing anything.
Mario Vega: Yep.
Mario Vega: Who can we reach out from Besu's side?
Mario Vega: sorry, who can we reach from Beso's side to… that has the details on this specific.
Justin Florentine (Besu): So, Mezian Hamlot, who's currently out for August, is our performance engineer, but Simon Dudley has been doing a lot of this testing as well. He's in the Australian time zone, though, so he doesn't usually make these calls.
Mario Vega: Excellent. We try to reach him async, just to see if we can implement the same test in East, yeah.
Mario Vega: Camille, yeah?
Kamil Chodoła: So, yeah, just last question, by 20 megas, you mean 20MGAS per second performance?
Justin Florentine (Besu): Yes.
Kamil Chodoła: Okay, yeah, so here is, yeah, all for the decision if 20 megah is something which we want to treat right now as a security concern, or we should fit into, like, 4-second execution time.
Kamil Chodoła: So, based on that, the decision should be made. Like, best would be, of course, to be below, even 2.
Kamil Chodoła: But, yeah.
Kamil Chodoła: ModeXP, as I can see for now, for sure, there is some work needs to be done for GEF.
Kamil Chodoła: Where we have 15, or something like that, while Bezu's slowest scenario, which we have right now for Bezu on our end, is 19.
Kamil Chodoła: And whenever I was thinking about any potential…
Kamil Chodoła: increase. It would be that it would be good to be…
Kamil Chodoła: But worst scenario is not above 3 seconds.
Kamil Chodoła: And surely not above, or close to 4.
Kamil Chodoła: With GAF, it is for exactly.
Kamil Chodoła: With Bezos, it will be close to free.
Mario Vega: Alright, thank you.
Mario Vega: …
Mario Vega: And yeah, Luis from East, team, he shared a… the links to the exact test that we're running on Eastside. So yeah, just for reference.
Mario Vega: If anybody wants to take a look.
Mario Vega: All right, cool. Anything else on benchmarking, or we can move on to the next, … Next topic.
Kamil Chodoła: One thing only for me, that whenever any client team or anyone here listening is building any new scenarios or any new tools, please maybe consider at first.
Kamil Chodoła: to work on EST benchmarking approach.
Kamil Chodoła: So, this way, we'll be able to run it on our existing infrastructure and verify it against all of the clients.
Kamil Chodoła: Even recently, if Efrex from Lambda team, Lambda Class team is joined, so they are also being verified right now.
Kamil Chodoła: So it would be really cool to follow that approach moving forward, rather than creating separate tools, because it will add additional level of complexity to integrate everything.
Mario Vega: Makes sense. Perfect. Yeah, thank you so much.
Mario Vega: Cool. Alright, before jumping into…
Mario Vega: The next topic is Sunnyside Lives, but I think there's a quick topic that Barnabas just brought up about the PR that has to be merged.
Mario Vega: When I shared the link?
Mario Vega: Here, Barnabas, anything that you want to add to this, this PR?
Mario Vega: Any comments?
Barnabas: Yeah, so my general comments would be that ideally, we want to be able to locally test blood numbers over 32 as well, and this limitation, is, present in the minimal preset only, so this is a CL-only change.
Barnabas: I don't even want to pump this to the team that uses mainnet, so we can test a larger number of,
Barnabas: Blob's throughput as well.
Barnabas: Please take a look and, …
Barnabas: Approve it if you want, and argue if you don't.
Barnabas: And ideally, they should make it into the full releases. We're gonna… if everybody agrees, then we can include it in Alpha 5 release with Justin.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Sorry, Barnabas, was that for me?
Barnabas: This is for CLW.
Mario Vega: CL specs, just in… just in trouble.
stokes: Is there any reason to not do this, Barnabas?
Barnabas: Not that I can see.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Yeah, it seems fine, just from a first pass.
stokes: For me.
Barnabas: The only reason not to do it is, it's so late.
Barnabas: But that's about it.
Mario Vega: Alright.
Mario Vega: Yeah, please comment and approve if we are moving forward, or was just, … leave the comments.
Mario Vega: Alright, thank you.
Mario Vega: The next topic is Sunnyside Labs.
Mario Vega: …
Mario Vega: Yeah, I just wanted to put this point here, if there's anything to share, but I'm not sure if anyone from Sunnyside has joined the call.
Mario Vega: Or if there is any updates.
Minhyuk Kim: Oh, yeah, I, ….
Mario Vega: Thank you.
Minhyuk Kim: I'm Mina from SciSight Labs. We don't have anything much new since last week, except for this report that we put out on Discord last week, so please check it out if you haven't, and…
Minhyuk Kim: Thank you.
Mario Vega: Excellent. Thanks.
Mario Vega: All right. Yeah, and, the last topic… …
Mario Vega: is the sephe discussion. I think Mikhail raised this on… ACDE last week.
Mario Vega: But I'm really not sure if there's any updates on that, or if Mikhail can comment on this topic.
Mario Vega: So, I just added it to have a follow-up discussion today, but if there's not news on this, or if there's no one here that can comment on this.
Mario Vega: … Let me share the link to the comment in the chat.
Mario Vega: this discussion I'm referring to.
Mario Vega: Basically, the safe head, …
Mario Vega: on the… on the EL clients, there was a discussion at the last ACDE, about changing the semantics or the behavior of this endpoint.
Mario Vega: … Is there anybody here that has more, context on this, or any updates on this topic?
Mario Vega: Seems like not.
Mario Vega: Yeah, we can follow up this topic on the ACDE, I assume.
Mario Vega: Alright, that was the last topic in the agenda for today. Anything else that anybody wants to bring up, or any concerns?
Mario Vega: About any other topic?
Mario Vega: Going once… Going twice.
Marius van der Wijden: I have something really quick. I just looked through the benchmarks, and I noticed that Keth and Aragon are at 30… 30, 33 million gas for the point evaluation precompile.
Marius van der Wijden: So… I think it's probably…
Marius van der Wijden: would be nice for those teams, us and Aragon, to look into this.
Marius van der Wijden: Because those are the only cases
Marius van der Wijden: Significantly below 60 megabytes per second, for those clients. So, point evaluation precompile.
Kamil Chodoła: Isn't it that it is more or less the same performance for all of the clients, because of how it works right now?
Kamil Chodoła: And the only way to improve that would be to just reprice it.
Marius van der Wijden: Is it? I don't know, I didn't look at the other clients.
Kamil Chodoła: just opening that right now, but as far as I recall, this performs almost identically for all of the clients.
Marius van der Wijden: That's probably because they use the KZG library for it, right?
Marcin Sobczak: Yeah, I recall the sign. It was about 50 to 52 megabits per second for all the clients.
Marius van der Wijden: But I… I don't see it in the Netherland chart, so… I don't know.
Kamil Chodoła: Nethermind is there, but … for some reason, we have warming enabled for that scenario.
Kamil Chodoła: Yeah, and this throws Netherland quite high on the chart.
Marius van der Wijden: Okay.
Kamil Chodoła: But without it, it will be also on the same level, as I recall from the past results.
Kamil Chodoła: Just some recent merge, … Make it, again, fast.
Marius van der Wijden: Yeah, I think that this is probably a case for optimizing CKZG.
Marius van der Wijden: And or repricing the party valuation pre-compan.
Mario Vega: Do we need.
Kamil Chodoła: I mean,
Mario Vega: Oh, sorry, I just want to mention if we are missing any cases on this, on the east.
Kamil Chodoła: The scenario is performing exactly the same.
Mario Vega: So far.
Kamil Chodoła: identical, ours and East, exactly the same.
Kamil Chodoła: Both with same performance, …
Kamil Chodoła: Just that, at least with my assumption that it is more or less around 32, 33 megacity per second.
Kamil Chodoła: It does not much violate the rule of 3-4 second blocks.
Kamil Chodoła: It's on 3 seconds, actually.
Kamil Chodoła: So, yet to be, maybe, considered, how much it affects the 100 goal, or something.
Kamil Chodoła: We can bring it to the discussion.
Kamil Chodoła: To consider it moving forward.
Kamil Chodoła: But definitely, if we want to go higher, we need to consider either some optimizations in the library.
Kamil Chodoła: As we all use the same one?
Kamil Chodoła: Or repricing for Glamsterdam?
Barnabas: One more note, could every, EL try to think to proof that too, and see locally what kind of problems you're facing?
Barnabas: Because none of them… none of the clients being able to sync on our sync test seems to be…
Barnabas: There might be some other underlying issue.
Kamil Chodoła: We're looking at mine for us.
Mario Vega: Thank you. Alright.
Mario Vega: Anything else?
Mario Vega: It seems like we have to take a look at these, benchmark results, unify, and …
Mario Vega: take a follow-up on next week's ACDT, if possible.
Mario Vega: …
Mario Vega: Anyway, okay, any other topics?
Mario Vega: Anybody wants to bring up?
Mario Vega: Before we… we wrap up?
Mario Vega: Okay, if not, I think that's it for today. Thanks, everyone, for joining.
Mario Vega: And see you next, well, next Thursday, on ECDC.
Mario Vega: Thank you, everyone.
Barnabas: Curt.
spencer-tb: Thank you, myself.
Kamil Chodoła: Right?
Ansgar Dietrichs: Everyone.
stokes: Thank you.
Marius van der Wijden: Let's put it.